Ripe red juicy tomatoes: Tomatoes are a key ingredient here which form the base of the makhani sauce or gravy. Makhani sauce is prepared from scratch with fresh ingredients like tomatoes (specifically pureed tomatoes), cashews and butter. Onions can be added if you want. Though traditionally onions are never added in a makhani gravy. So do use tomatoes that are ripe and have a slight sweetness in them. Avoid adding tomatoes that are sour or too tart or unripe.
Cashews: Yet another important ingredient is cashews which imparts a lovely creaminess and sheen in the dish. The sweetness of the cashews also balances the tanginess of the tomatoes. Generally in butter chicken or butter paneer, cream is added. To give a creamy consistency and a sweet tinge, I add both cashew paste and cream.
Cream: As mentioned above, apart from cashews I also add a bit of cream which thickens the gravy slightly and makes it rich. Though adding cream can be skipped for a less rich version.
Butter: The amount of butter that is added is not huge but just right in this paneer butter masala recipe. Butter makes the curry a bit rich and buttery. Though you can go overboard by adding some more butter.
Paneer: A quality of paneer can make or break your dish. What you want are succulent soft paneer cubes gently coated with a smooth, buttery tomato sauce. So make sure to use either homemade paneer or good quality store brought paneer. Follow the instructions on the package before using paneer.
Spices & herbs: The list of spices is not much. For that brilliant orange color, you need to add kashmiri red chilli powder. You can sub it with cayenne pepper or paprika. You will also need garam masala powder. Kasuri methi which are dried fenugreek leaves also add a good flavor. Just skip them if you do not have. For garnish cilantro (coriander leaves) are added.
Eat with the staple Indian bread roti: Paneer butter masala gravy has a slightly sweet taste and very mildly spiced. Thus making it an excellent gravy to go with roti or chapati.
With other Indian breads: Another great combination for this dish is naan bread or tandoori roti or paratha or roomali roti or Malabar paratha.
With rice: It also goes well with steamed basmati rice or jeera rice (cumin rice).